Okay.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon.
Um, so, uh, my lecture today, I want to talk
NOTE CONF
about, uh, combinatorial algorithms.
But first, a couple of announcements.
NOTE CONF
Um, so this morning, uh, the programming project was released.
It's on the course learn page.
NOTE CONF
You can download it.
Um, uh, it's worth 20% of the mark for this
NOTE CONF
course.
You have until the Friday in one, two, three weeks
NOTE CONF
to submit it.
Um, uh, let's see.
NOTE CONF
Um, you might have questions about it.
Um, before you start, um, I suggest that maybe tomorrow's
NOTE CONF
lecture would be a good time to ask those questions.
I mean, you can ask another time if you want,
NOTE CONF
but tomorrow's, uh, you know, tomorrow you would have had
a chance to look at it a bit and think
NOTE CONF
about, uh, think about it.
I've.
NOTE CONF
I've designed it.
So.
NOTE CONF
So it's a course.
It's.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
It's a project for implementing sequent calculus.
NOTE CONF
For those of you who haven't looked at it yet,
implementing sequence calculus in Haskell.
NOTE CONF
So it combines computation and logic and functional programming.
And I've tried to design it so that you can,
NOTE CONF
uh, uh, get maximum feedback on your progress as you
go.
NOTE CONF
So there are tests that, um, are published in the,
in the project last two pages of the of the
NOTE CONF
project handout has a list of tests that your code
is going to be subjected to.
NOTE CONF
And those tests have been, uh, uh, have been put
into the auto checker.
NOTE CONF
Auto.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Auto checker.
Uh, so when you submit your code, it will go
NOTE CONF
through the, through those tests and you can see what
the results are.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, getting a certain number of certain ones of
these tests, passing a certain number of these tests gives
NOTE CONF
you a certain numbers of points.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So you should be able to it's essentially you can
mark your project yourself.
NOTE CONF
Um, almost your tutors will also be looking at your
code.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
All right.
So anyway that's, that's designed to make it, um, you
NOTE CONF
know, remove, uh, doubt.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so today and tomorrow I'm going to be talking
about combinatorial Algorithms next week.
NOTE CONF
Um, you have, uh, lectures from Phil Wadler on monads.
So Phil Wadler is one of the designers of Haskell,
NOTE CONF
and he is the guy who, uh, introduced monads into
Haskell.
NOTE CONF
So what are monads?
Will you find out next week from Phil?
NOTE CONF
But it's a kind of answer to the question of,
um, how do you get Haskell to actually, uh, do
NOTE CONF
anything other than calculate?
Other than calculate.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
How do you get it to, uh, print things and
NOTE CONF
consume input and so forth.
So monads is the answer.
NOTE CONF
And Phil will tell you about them next week.
So I'm going to be a way that next week,
NOTE CONF
um, the week after that is the last week of
semester.
NOTE CONF
And uh, it's quite possible that the Monday lecture will
be cancelled because I think by then, unless Phil takes
NOTE CONF
longer than he should, uh, we will have covered everything.
Uh, in the FP strand.
NOTE CONF
Um, the Tuesday of the last week.
Week is the, um, is the, uh, the programming, uh,
NOTE CONF
competition, uh, prize giving.
So on that day, the beginning of that lecture will
NOTE CONF
be devoted to showing what the submissions were and then
handing out prizes to the to the ones who won
NOTE CONF
the prizes.
And then the rest of that lecture will be another,
NOTE CONF
uh, lecture from Phil Wadler, a special end of, um,
end, of course lecture.
NOTE CONF
Um, that is something you will not want to miss.
Uh, legendary, uh, performance.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, but today combinatorial algorithms.
NOTE CONF
So this is another lecture in this sequence where I'm
using Haskell, um, uh, to explain something else rather than
NOTE CONF
to show you new features and so forth.
So I'm using Haskell because it's very convenient to write
NOTE CONF
the programs I'm going to be writing using list comprehensions.
Uh, so very simple short programs that way.
NOTE CONF
Um, list comprehensions in combination with recursion.
The topic is, is algorithms to solve problems that are
NOTE CONF
intractable or close to intractable.
Um, so, uh, by that I mean, um, uh, where
NOTE CONF
you are sometimes, um, the best way to solve the
problem is to enumerate possible solutions and check them to
NOTE CONF
see if they're actually solutions or not.
This is so called generate and test.
NOTE CONF
Um, algorithms.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And when I say intractable I mean um, uh, two
to the n uh, complexity or sometimes worse Um or
NOTE CONF
algorithms which which might be that bad, but we can
do a bit better by being clever.
NOTE CONF
So you've seen situations where we can be clever by
using clever data representation.
NOTE CONF
So for example, the balanced binary trees was an example
of that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But there are some cases where you can't you can't
NOTE CONF
actually do much better than um than generate and test.
Um, and then there are things which are, which are
NOTE CONF
kind of in between.
So an example of something that's in between is the
NOTE CONF
satisfiability problem.
So you've learned about the um DPL algorithm for solving
NOTE CONF
satisfiability problems.
And when you did e when you did the um
NOTE CONF
tutorial, uh, associated with that, um, you would have been
running that algorithm and seeing that it's actually able to
NOTE CONF
deal with quite big, uh, you know, huge numbers of
clauses, um, quite efficiently or comparatively efficiently.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so that's a case of a clever algorithm that
finds a solution most of the time quite quickly.
NOTE CONF
But actually in the worst case, um, satisfiability is is
an intractable problem.
NOTE CONF
So, um, DHFL will not always find a solution quickly.
And in the worst case, it takes some two to
NOTE CONF
the n time where n is the number of variables
in the um in the in the clauses.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And that's the same complexity as producing a truth table,
NOTE CONF
uh, for the, for all of the clauses.
And um, and finding a row that has a true
NOTE CONF
at the end.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So generating all the possible, uh, you know, combinations of
things and then looking for one that's, uh.
NOTE CONF
That's correct.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, another example of an intractable problem is finding,
um, prime factors of a large number.
NOTE CONF
And that fact that that's intractable is what's lies behind,
um, cryptography methods, I mean, methods.
NOTE CONF
Uh, yeah.
So all of the, all the cryptography methods that are
NOTE CONF
used to do things like, uh, keep your bank account,
uh, transactions secret.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Another example of a problem that's, um, uh, okay.
NOTE CONF
So I should say, um, the example of DPL is,
uh, is an example that shows that worst case, um,
NOTE CONF
complexity, which is what we've been concentrating on.
I've been talking, you know, I've been talking about the
NOTE CONF
worst case.
So if the tree isn't balanced or if DHFL doesn't
NOTE CONF
find the solution quickly.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's about worst case complexity.
But the fact that DHFL often finds the solution fairly
NOTE CONF
quickly shows that that's not everything.
And another example that shows that it's not everything is
NOTE CONF
actually the the type checker in Haskell.
Um, so this style of type checking was invented in
NOTE CONF
the 1970s and it was implemented in different programming languages.
Um, and, you know, since then and used by a
NOTE CONF
lot of people and nobody knew what the, what the
complexity of this algorithm was.
NOTE CONF
It was a little bit complicated to figure it out.
Um, and but everybody was happy.
NOTE CONF
It ran quite quickly.
Uh, you, you could, you know, run your programs through
NOTE CONF
it, would infer your type automatically.
Um, everything was wonderful.
NOTE CONF
And it was a big surprise when it was discovered
more than 20 years after the algorithm was invented, that
NOTE CONF
it was, in fact, worst case, uh, complexity.
Horrendous.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, I don't know, um, what it is in
terms of, um, the style of, um, you know, whether
NOTE CONF
it's two to the n, I think it probably is
two to the N, or perhaps even worse than two
NOTE CONF
to the N.
Um, but there's almost no programs that achieve this, um,
NOTE CONF
this worst case.
So you have to try.
NOTE CONF
I mean, none of the natural programs that you would
write to do anything have have that worst case behaviour.
NOTE CONF
And so the fact that in the worst case, it's,
it's intractable is meaningless.
NOTE CONF
In that particular example, you have to go really out
of your way and look very hard to find something
NOTE CONF
that, um, that does badly.
Anyway.
NOTE CONF
Um, so a situation where the number of possible solutions
grows rapidly with the problem size is called combinatorial explosion.
NOTE CONF
And this is another example of this sort of thing
is, um, so-called travelling salesman problem.
NOTE CONF
This is one of the famous, um, intractable, intractable problems.
It's a situation where you have a bunch of cities
NOTE CONF
that the salesman is supposed to visit, or sales person
is supposed to visit, and you're looking for the the
NOTE CONF
shortest length route, which will visit all of the cities
once and without repetitions.
NOTE CONF
And the only way to solve that, or at least
the only way that's known to solve that, is to
NOTE CONF
enumerate all the possible routes and then, um, measure them
to see which one is the shortest.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, sometimes we can do better for that.
NOTE CONF
And we're going to be looking at some of these
things now.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And I'll start with some sorry.
NOTE CONF
The microphone is doing strange things I think because it's
too close.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I'm going to start by looking at some functions that
NOTE CONF
I need to to tell you about in order to
talk about the problems that I want to talk about.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, now you've seen already So it removes repetitions
from a list.
NOTE CONF
So for example um nub of avocado.
So there's two A's and two O's in that.
NOTE CONF
So if you apply nub to it it uh removes
the, the repetitions.
NOTE CONF
Um, if you apply it to a string or a
list that doesn't have repetitions, then it doesn't it doesn't
NOTE CONF
change anything.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we've seen that before.
Just reminding you what it's called.
NOTE CONF
It's in the it's built into Haskell in one of
the libraries.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I'm going to be talking about, um, problems that work
NOTE CONF
on lists.
Most of the things I'm going to be talking about
NOTE CONF
are working on lists.
And, um, they're working on lists that contain no repetitions.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Which is why I just told you about nub.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And, um, to check to see if a list contains
NOTE CONF
no repetitions, we can apply this function, uh, distinct, which
is defined here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Just happens the problems I'm going to be talking about,
uh, make sense when we're talking about such, such, such
NOTE CONF
lists.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And, um, you can check to see if a list
is distinct in this sense.
NOTE CONF
Uh, if it's equal to it's nub.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is taking advantage of the fact that nub, um,
preserves the order of elements.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, avocado is not distinct because it contains repetitions,
whereas peach is distinct.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
In this sense of distinct.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So these are just preliminaries, um, that I want to
NOTE CONF
mention before I dive into the actual problems I want
to solve.
NOTE CONF
Just one last thing is I'm going to be using
QuickCheck to test my, um, my solutions.
NOTE CONF
And, um, you know, you're familiar with QuickCheck.
It generates 100 test cases and then tries the thing.
NOTE CONF
You want to check on each of those test cases.
The problem here is going to be that for the
NOTE CONF
problems I'm looking at, um, if the test cases are
large, then they will take forever to to check.
NOTE CONF
So this is this is a quick check with a
bound on the size of the test cases.
NOTE CONF
So I can I can.
So I'm calling this function size check.
NOTE CONF
And I give it a number.
And that's the kind of maximum size of test cases
NOTE CONF
that it's going to generate.
If I, if I apply this function and um, it's
NOTE CONF
um, it's using uh, one of the documented parameters of,
of, of quick check, you can find these parameters and
NOTE CONF
documentation.
Um, there's a pointer in the textbook if you're interested.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, so this is something which controls the maximum
Size of the of the test cases.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So there are things I'm going to be looking at
that really would take too long if you don't, uh,
NOTE CONF
restrict the size of the test cases.
So the first problem I want to look at is
NOTE CONF
looking at sublists of a lists.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And this is like, um, like subset.
You've seen subset already.
NOTE CONF
Um, if the lists are representing, um, uh, sets.
So, um, you know, is, is a list a subset
NOTE CONF
of another list?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Well, um, here's a, here's a function that you've seen
already for checking this.
NOTE CONF
I called it subset before.
Um, uh, so uh, x is is a subset is
NOTE CONF
sub list of Ys if all of the elements in
XS.
NOTE CONF
So we use a list comprehension here.
So um for um x taken from XZ.
NOTE CONF
Uh, we're checking to see if x is an element
of y's where LM is this built in list membership
NOTE CONF
function in Haskell.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, and if that's the case for all x and
xz.
NOTE CONF
So we do a conjunction here to uh to compute
that.
NOTE CONF
Then x is is a sub list of y's.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So you've seen this code before.
Um, so I'm just reminding you.
NOTE CONF
And so for example, uh, this list of characters P
a this is a sub list of, of Apple.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Because, uh, you know, here's a P, here's an E,
NOTE CONF
and here's an A.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So all of the characters in that list are in
this list.
NOTE CONF
So it's a sub list.
On the other hand peach is not a sublist of
NOTE CONF
apple because you know P a is there, but C
and H are not there.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so that's what I mean by a sublist.
And now comes the problem.
NOTE CONF
Um, suppose I want to generate all the sublists of
a list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
How many are there?
NOTE CONF
Um, so I said already that sub list of a
list is like a subset of a set.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, so does anybody know how many subsets there are
NOTE CONF
of a set?
Set of size n.
NOTE CONF
How many subsets?
Yeah, two to the N, correct.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Very good.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
So the set of all subsets of a set is
NOTE CONF
called the power set.
And it has two to the n elements.
NOTE CONF
So, um.
First example of something with two to the end in
NOTE CONF
this lecture so far.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so.
So in a subset of xz, every element of xz
NOTE CONF
is either in this, in that sub list or not.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And why do we get two to the N of
them.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So uh little diagram.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So here is our my list of n elements.
NOTE CONF
And um for each of these elements.
I'm thinking about putting it into a sub list.
NOTE CONF
So this is my sub list.
And so for X1, is it going to be in
NOTE CONF
or is it going to be out?
Question mark.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Two choices for X2.
NOTE CONF
Is it going to be in or out.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Again two choices.
And same for x3.
NOTE CONF
And all the way down to x n okay.
So we've got for every one of these elements we've
NOTE CONF
got two choices.
And so we've got two times two times two times
NOTE CONF
two choices.
And that's um two to the n okay.
NOTE CONF
Because there's n okay.
There's n independent uh, two way choices okay.
NOTE CONF
And you know, you get the list itself.
If all of these choices is in is, is to
NOTE CONF
put them in.
Uh, if you if all the choices is to leave
NOTE CONF
it out, then you get the empty list.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And so here is a here is code that basically
uses that idea to generate the list of all sublists.
NOTE CONF
Or maybe I'll maybe I'll leave that out in case
I leave that up in case it's helpful.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um, looking at the looking at the the recursive
NOTE CONF
case here, this is using recursion.
Um, so, uh, it's saying that if we've got a
NOTE CONF
non-empty list, then to generate all the sublists of that
non-empty list okay.
NOTE CONF
List is x cons xs.
So we generate all the sub lists of xs and
NOTE CONF
um and all of those are going to be sub
lists of x cons xs.
NOTE CONF
This is this corresponds to the case over here where
um, the new thing that I'm, that I'm adding, okay,
NOTE CONF
let's say let's say we're looking at the case where
it's the list x one cons everything else.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, this first bunch of sub lists or all
the sub lists of everything else where we've decided not
NOTE CONF
to add x1, or in this case, it's in this
case it's x.
NOTE CONF
Right.
And then and then the other ones here.
NOTE CONF
These are all the cases where we've, um, decided to
add in this other element.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we're taking all the, um.
NOTE CONF
Whoops.
Oh well, my highlighting went away.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Yeah, we're taking all the sublists of XS and we're
NOTE CONF
adding X into them.
Okay, so all the sublists of XS without x added,
NOTE CONF
all the sublists of XS with x added.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And in the case of the empty list, it isn't
the case.
NOTE CONF
Usually we are.
Very often we have some space cases of these sorts
NOTE CONF
of things where, you know function apply to empty list
is equal to the empty list.
NOTE CONF
In this case that's not appropriate because there is one
sublist of the empty list, namely the empty list.
NOTE CONF
And that's why it's the single element of this of
this result.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The other reason is if this was empty, then this
NOTE CONF
recursion would never produce anything because it's always working from
the sub.
NOTE CONF
You know, the sublists of the, of the, of the
next smaller size.
NOTE CONF
And if we start off with nil then we just
take nil.
NOTE CONF
cons map of something onto nil, and so forth.
We'd never get any any sublists.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so, um.
NOTE CONF
Uh, the code for this is downloadable in, uh, along
with the lecture slides.
NOTE CONF
And so I've got it all, um, running here on
my laptop, and so we can check to see, you
NOTE CONF
know, about, uh, what are the sub lists of, um,
of whatever you want.
NOTE CONF
So, um.
You know, those are all the the sub lists of,
NOTE CONF
um, of, uh, the the list from numbers from one
to 1 to 4.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, we can check to see if the length
of that is, uh, is what it should be.
NOTE CONF
It's 16.
So that's two to the four.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Um, let's try, uh, 1.., uh, eight.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
256.
That's two to the eight.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so I won't print those out because there's, uh,
it's just a screen full of numbers.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Have you got that?
NOTE CONF
That's okay.
That's an easy.
NOTE CONF
That's an easy, um, example of the kind of thing
that I'm going to be doing here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so intractable in the sense that it's, um, producing
NOTE CONF
a very large output.
Um, other problems we're going to be looking at are
NOTE CONF
going to be producing, being produced smaller outputs that are
going to be more difficult to produce.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
For the problems that I'm going to be looking at,
NOTE CONF
I'm going to be doing a quick check test to
make sure that they are, um, are satisfy the properties
NOTE CONF
that I want.
And so I'm going to be in each case showing
NOTE CONF
you these.
So.
NOTE CONF
So the property that I want subs to satisfy is
relatively complicated compared with the sort of properties that you've
NOTE CONF
been used to seeing.
So this is uh, this is saying that, uh, for,
NOTE CONF
for lists, exes which are distinct.
Remember that means no repetitions.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Then, um, then first of all, um, anything in anything
NOTE CONF
in this, uh, in this result, subs of X's, any
Y's is going to indeed be a sub list of
NOTE CONF
exes.
Okay, so we're only generating sub lists here.
NOTE CONF
Um, and we're not generating any of the sub lists
twice.
NOTE CONF
That's what this says okay.
Each of them is distinct from the others.
NOTE CONF
And not only that, but each of the sublists is
themselves distinct, meaning there's no repetitions in the sublists.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
These are these are different properties.
NOTE CONF
These are this is no repeated elements in the sublists.
And this is no sublist generated twice.
NOTE CONF
And and you know, whereas this first property said everything
we generate is a sublist.
NOTE CONF
Um, the last property here is that we're generating all
of them.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So the number that we generate is, is what we
NOTE CONF
expect.
It's two to the, to the length to the power
NOTE CONF
of the length of the sublist of the length of
the list.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So I mean this could be satisfied.
NOTE CONF
The rest of these things could be satisfied if the
subs function would generate only the empty list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But this is the one that's saying we have to
NOTE CONF
actually get enough of them.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I could, uh, you know, I can apply this
to, um.
NOTE CONF
You know, I can do it over here.
It's more exciting to see it actually happening.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It takes.
NOTE CONF
It takes a second.
Um, and, um, it, uh, it passes 100 tests.
NOTE CONF
Um, by the way, this this thing here, you see
it?
NOTE CONF
You see it on the on the, uh, you see
it up there and you see it in the slide.
NOTE CONF
Um, what is this business about 30 discarded.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so you you may or may not have, uh,
used properties that had, uh, this kind of thing in
NOTE CONF
them.
So these are sort of preconditions on properties.
NOTE CONF
So I'm interested in checking this property, but only for
the cases where X is is distinct.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is sort of conditional property that I'm checking.
NOTE CONF
And um, quick check allows that.
And it looks for 100 tests.
NOTE CONF
Uh, but, uh, disregarding the ones that don't satisfy this
property.
NOTE CONF
And so 30 discarded here means it checked actually 130
um, uh, test cases, but 30 of them didn't pass
NOTE CONF
this, um, this, uh, this precondition.
So that's what that means.
NOTE CONF
And by the way, this reminds me, I should, uh,
check I should, uh, set the timer, um, so that
NOTE CONF
when I do a, um.
Yeah, this is set up so that, um, when you,
NOTE CONF
um, when you run a computation, it tells you how
much time and space it took.
NOTE CONF
I don't know if you've seen this before.
I think I've shown it to you.
NOTE CONF
And it's in the practical, uh, in the exercise this
week.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so that's, uh, generating sublists of lists.
I now want to talk about, uh, permutations of a
NOTE CONF
list.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is this is all the ways of rearranging
this elements.
NOTE CONF
So not not um, not all of the lists which
are contained within the first list, but, um, all the
NOTE CONF
ways of rearranging a list to, to um, yeah.
Of all, all the way to rearranging the elements of
NOTE CONF
lists.
And so how many of these are there?
NOTE CONF
Does anybody know?
So a list of length n how many ways are
NOTE CONF
there of rearranging the elements of n or permutations of
n?
NOTE CONF
I mean, I think you might know because it's a
standard thing that you do in, um, combinatorics, which is
NOTE CONF
something you might possibly have seen before.
Anybody know?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
N factorial.
Exactly.
NOTE CONF
Very good.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Um, and why is it n factorial?
Um, let's look, um.
NOTE CONF
So, um, we've got our list of n a list
of n elements.
NOTE CONF
Let me do this again.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And we're going to produce a new list of n
elements.
NOTE CONF
And it's the rearranged, uh, rearranged version of this.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And so for the first, for the first element, what
are we going to put here?
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
It could be any one of these elements.
NOTE CONF
So, um, well, I should just say there's, there's n
choices of what's going to go in here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Could be any any of these.
NOTE CONF
But once we've decided which one it is, it's not
eligible to go in any of the other places.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, so in position two, I don't have any
NOTE CONF
choices anymore.
I only have n minus one choices.
NOTE CONF
Okay, whichever one that is.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And in the next position, whatever it is that we
just put in there, there aren't going to be n
NOTE CONF
minus one choices anymore.
There's going to be n minus two choices.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so forth.
NOTE CONF
And when we get to the last position, there's only
going to be one choice because we've already used up
NOTE CONF
all of the other.
Um n minus one uh elements.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um, you know, n times n minus one, times
NOTE CONF
n minus two, etc. down to one, this is equal
to n factorial.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's some.
NOTE CONF
That's a large number.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So let's see how we generate these.
Um, so I have two, two ways of generating these
NOTE CONF
that I want to look at.
One of them, one of them is to use the
NOTE CONF
Cartesian product.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Cartesian product is, um.
Uh, well.
NOTE CONF
Let me just remind you by showing you an example.
Cartesian product of, um.
NOTE CONF
Uh, something like, um.
Of a list with three elements.
NOTE CONF
Um, of characters and another list with some four numbers
in it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It generates.
NOTE CONF
So this is the list of pairs with one element
from the first list and one element from the second
NOTE CONF
list.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's like, um, it's a product.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's the um, yeah.
The number of things in here is the size of
NOTE CONF
the first list times the size of the second list.
Because for each one of these pairs, we have to
NOTE CONF
pick one element from here and one element from here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Cartesian product UV.
This was, this was appeared already somewhere in the course.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so um, what I'm going to use here for
NOTE CONF
this, um, for this uh, permutation thing is um, I'm
just looking for the code.
NOTE CONF
Um, wait a minute.
Ah!
NOTE CONF
Come on.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Do I have this here?
No, I don't.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um.
NOTE CONF
So Cartesian product of of two lists.
There's the code.
NOTE CONF
You just, um, you just create pairs where, um, the
first element is from the first.
NOTE CONF
The second element is from the second list.
And in generalisation of that to um, to lists, um
NOTE CONF
uh, to taking Cartesian product, um of a list of
lists is is this okay?
NOTE CONF
So, um, Cartesian product of a list of lists you
first contain, you first generate the Cartesian product of um
NOTE CONF
of of the table of the list.
And then you, um, and then you add all the
NOTE CONF
possible, uh, elements from the first list to that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And here here's an example.
Um, here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So.
NOTE CONF
You know, if you, if you take, if you take
Cartesian product of these three lists okay.
NOTE CONF
So everyone here has an element from the first list,
an element from the second list, an element from the
NOTE CONF
third list.
So AC and and and so forth.
NOTE CONF
Um down to be d g okay.
And um, there's no repetitions there.
NOTE CONF
So that's um, that's Cartesian product.
And then the idea of um, of doing, of doing
NOTE CONF
um permutations using this um, is the code.
Is the code up there?
NOTE CONF
The idea is that a way to generate all the
permutations is to.
NOTE CONF
Is to take a list and take the n fold
Cartesian product of the list with itself.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, and then look for the ones of those that
NOTE CONF
are permutations of the original list, which means that they
contain no repetitions.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And that works.
NOTE CONF
So this is what this this is what this code
does.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Remember CP is Cartesian product of a list of lists.
NOTE CONF
So you take you take the list that you're interested
in X is it has to be distinct.
NOTE CONF
No repetitions okay.
You take the um the n fold.
NOTE CONF
Uh, you take n copies of that.
That's what replicate does.
NOTE CONF
Takes a list and it gives you a list of
n copies of that thing.
NOTE CONF
So where n is the length of x is.
So we've got, we've got okay.
NOTE CONF
And then we take the Cartesian product of that.
And then we look through for all the ones that
NOTE CONF
are distinct okay.
No repetitions.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And and it works okay.
NOTE CONF
So you know.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It works.
And let me just do some experiments here.
NOTE CONF
So um, it works.
I'm going to be looking for the length of this
NOTE CONF
thing because I don't want to print them all out
because then the printing dominates.
NOTE CONF
So if I look for the permutations of the list
from one up to n um.
NOTE CONF
Computing is going to take a while.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Actually, I hope that wasn't too many.
It might have been too ambitious there.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Why is it taking a long time?
NOTE CONF
Okay, so think about what it's doing here.
Okay, so, um, it's taking the, um, the enfold Cartesian
NOTE CONF
product of this list.
This list is of length ten.
NOTE CONF
It's taking the n fold product, the ten fold product
of a list of length ten with itself.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's, um, that's ten to the ten lists.
NOTE CONF
Ten to the ten is 10 billion.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's, it's it's producing a 10 billion lists.
And then it's looking at each one of those lists
NOTE CONF
to see whether it contains repetitions or not.
okay.
NOTE CONF
We know that they're going to be um and ten
factorial of those.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So.
NOTE CONF
Let's do a little computation here.
Oops.
NOTE CONF
You can't see it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to go through 10 billion.
You can't see it.
NOTE CONF
Uh thank you.
What can you see.
NOTE CONF
Oh you can't even you can't see anything.
That's a no good.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so this is this is the functions that the
thing's still computing.
NOTE CONF
So we've got 10 billion lists.
Um, so n factorial is, um, ten factorial is, um.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Uh, 3 million.
NOTE CONF
628,800.
Okay, so.
NOTE CONF
So what that means is that if I'm checking each
one of those to see whether it contains repetitions, only
NOTE CONF
that many of them, I mean, it's lots of them,
but but but that many of them are going to
NOTE CONF
succeed.
So it's, it's one in um, 2756.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
If I do the same computation for n equals 20,
NOTE CONF
I end up with, uh, it's one inch 43 million.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, and this is kind of the reason why this
is taking forever.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It still hasn't stopped.
NOTE CONF
I should have started with a smaller number.
Anyway, we can still wait for that and see how
NOTE CONF
long it takes.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so this is not a great way to do
this.
NOTE CONF
Let's think of something better.
I mean, the reason why it's not great is because
NOTE CONF
it's a generated search algorithm where the number of things
that it's asking to search through is enormous.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And and finding something.
NOTE CONF
So finding a needle in this huge haystack is taking
a long time because there's only only 1 in 7,
NOTE CONF
uh, 1 in 2756 of the things in the haystack
is a needle.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And when the when the problem gets larger, it's even
NOTE CONF
going to be a smaller proportion.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So what's a better way?
A better way is, uh, uses this function called splits.
NOTE CONF
Let me see what time it is.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So a better way.
We consider all the ways of splitting a list, which
NOTE CONF
means separating one element from the rest.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And that's what this function does.
So given a list, you, uh, you split it into
NOTE CONF
an element from the list and everything else in the
list.
NOTE CONF
And this function computes all the ways of doing that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So and this is going to be useful in our
definition of um of permutations okay.
NOTE CONF
So given a list X is.
Um a split one of the possible splits is um
NOTE CONF
is is if we take a value k from zero
up to n minus one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So these are the positions in the list x is
NOTE CONF
uh if x if n is the length of x
is.
NOTE CONF
Sorry, I should have said that first n is the
length of x is and the positions in X is
NOTE CONF
our index from zero up to n minus one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
There's n elements and their index starting from zero.
And so we can take we can take the um.
NOTE CONF
We can take the um the element in position k.
So that's our, that's our, you know, that's our element
NOTE CONF
that we're, that we're picking out.
And then the rest of the list is, is, is
NOTE CONF
produced by this by this here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It's the stuff before K and this stuff after k
and concatenated or appended.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so for example for the list ABC we've got
NOTE CONF
a together with BC, B together with AC and C
together with AB.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
For any list of length n there's going to be
NOTE CONF
um n splits one for every element in the list.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And the and the remainder is always going to be.
If you've got a list of length n these, these,
NOTE CONF
these lists here are always going to be n minus
one long.
NOTE CONF
And then using the splits function we can do perms.
Because I mean you remember what I was talking about
NOTE CONF
with the um, uh, computing, the uh, the number of
permutations there were I talked about.
NOTE CONF
You choose an element from the list and put it
in position one, and then and then, um, and then
NOTE CONF
you choose another element from the list, minus the first
one that you picked and put it in position two
NOTE CONF
and so forth.
And that's exactly what this algorithm is doing.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, you know, given a list, given a non-empty
NOTE CONF
list, it, uh, it computes the splits of that on
an empty list.
NOTE CONF
And um, and that gives you, uh, you know, a
bunch of a bunch of splits and taking taking one
NOTE CONF
of them, y ys.
We, um, we put y in the first position, and
NOTE CONF
then, um, and then, uh, uh, Zs here is, uh,
is taken from permutations of the remaining elements.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is, this is a slightly more complicated recursion
NOTE CONF
than what you're used to.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We're not recursing on.
You're used to that when you do, um, recursion on
NOTE CONF
a list, you do something with XZ, and then and
then the result is computed by doing something with y
NOTE CONF
and the elements that you get from, from that, from
that recursive call here it's a little more complicated.
NOTE CONF
We, we, we divide x cons xs into y comma
y's.
NOTE CONF
We do something with Y's.
Uh, we come up with Zs and then we combine
NOTE CONF
Y with uh, elements of Zs.
Okay, so, um, a little bit more, uh, complicated, but
NOTE CONF
same, same basic pattern here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, you know, so looking, for example, a moment
ago, we had, um, you know, splits being a, uh,
NOTE CONF
a comma b c was the first one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And so and so from this we get the permutations
of of BC are BC and CB.
NOTE CONF
And then we attach a to the front of them.
And the second thing in our list of splits was
NOTE CONF
b uh comma AC.
And so here we get b and then a, c
NOTE CONF
and b with c a.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So um.
Let's see what's happening with our, with our thing here.
NOTE CONF
Oh this is still going.
Oh well I don't know how long this will take.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to stop it.
Um Okay, well, it will have terminated eventually.
NOTE CONF
Uh, I would have expected it to actually finish by
now, but, um, perms is faster.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So length.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Faster, but not but not instantaneous.
NOTE CONF
I'm expecting about five seconds.
Oh, sorry.
NOTE CONF
No, sorry.
This one's going to be 18 seconds.
NOTE CONF
I should have started with a smaller one.
Anyway, this one's about 18 seconds, I think.
NOTE CONF
The other one.
I don't know how long it would have taken, but
NOTE CONF
a lot, a lot longer.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Oh, yeah.
There we go.
NOTE CONF
18 seconds, 18.81 seconds.
Okay, so still it's taking a while.
NOTE CONF
It's generating, um, ten factorial, um, things.
But, um, in a much more efficient way.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And, um.
NOTE CONF
How much time do I have?
Right.
NOTE CONF
Um, so these are the properties that, uh, that permutations
has to satisfy.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, you know, uh, everything in the list that it
NOTE CONF
generates has to be a permutation.
They're all distinct.
NOTE CONF
Um, they're all different.
And, um, there's the number of them that we expect.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I have just two minutes.
NOTE CONF
It gives me just a chance to, um, mention the
next thing I'm going to be looking at.
NOTE CONF
So this is about, uh, choosing, um, a k elements
from a list of length n, and, um, uh, this
NOTE CONF
is another classic problem in combinatorics, which is, um.
I don't know if you know this notation.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, choosing Key elements from a list of length n
NOTE CONF
okay, the.
This is the number of ways that you can do
NOTE CONF
that.
Um, and um, the number of ways is um, is
NOTE CONF
this.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And this is called binomial coefficient.
Um, uh, it's the coefficient when you compute.
NOTE CONF
Well I'll have to explain it next time.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
So that's my next problem.
Remember uh, to have a look at the programming project
NOTE CONF
and come with your questions next time okay.
So thank you for your attention.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
More than.
NOTE CONF
Any product.
We.
NOTE CONF
Build wealth every day with trading.
Two.
NOTE CONF
Invest with zero commission.
We were good.
NOTE CONF
We were gold.
Kind of dream that can't be sold.
NOTE CONF
We were right till we weren't Built a home and
watched it burn.
NOTE CONF
I didn't want to leave you.
I didn't want to lie.
NOTE CONF
Started to cry.
But then I remembered I.
NOTE CONF
I can buy my soul flowers by my name in
the sand.
NOTE CONF
Talk to myself for hours.
See things you don't understand.
NOTE CONF
I can take my soul dancing.
And I can hold my own head.
NOTE CONF
Yeah I can love me better than you can love
me.
NOTE CONF
I can love me better.
Baby.
NOTE CONF
You love me better.
Are you love me better?
NOTE CONF
Ain't my nails cherry red?
Match the roses.
NOTE CONF
That you left.
No No regret.
NOTE CONF
I forgive every.
Word you say.
NOTE CONF
Ooh.
I didn't want to leave you, babe.
NOTE CONF
I didn't wanna fight.
Started to cry, but then remembered I.
NOTE CONF
I can promise the flowers round my name in the
sand.
NOTE CONF
Talk to myself or I will say things you don't
understand.
NOTE CONF
But I can take my soul dancing, yeah, I can
hold.
NOTE CONF
Morning.
Yeah I can love me better than you can love
NOTE CONF
bear.
I can love me better when you love me better.
NOTE CONF
I can love you better.
Baby.
NOTE CONF
You love me better.
I can love you better, baby.
NOTE CONF
Better.
Love me better.
NOTE CONF
I.